Introduction First Draft (#3)
catalystneuro/2023-ecosystem-paper: README.md

Despite the numerous advantages offered by NWB and DANDI, widespread adoption is hindered by a multitude of challenges, each presenting a distinct hurdle for laboratories seeking to seamlessly integrate these resources into their research workflows. First, adopting NWB requires at least a summary understanding of its data organization and principles, the sheer scale of which can be daunting for those unfamiliar with its structure. This learning curve poses a substantial obstacle, slowing down the assimilation of NWB standards into the daily practices of research labs. In addition, the utilization of data Application Programming Interfaces (APIs), such as _pyNWB_ or _MatNWB_, demands a level of programming expertise that may be beyond the reach of researchers with limited coding experience. This technical barrier creates an accessibility gap, restricting the adoption of NWB to those proficient in programming or placing an outsized burden on those, often junior, lab members with the necessary expertise.

> If labs do make the decision to adopt the NWB standard, they often find themselves motivated to convert their backlogged data to the NWB format. Recognizing the advantages of NWB, labs aim to ensure that their extensive historical datasets align with this standardized framework, enhancing data interoperability, collaboration, and long-term accessibility. However, this effort tends to be a substantial bottleneck in the transition to NWB. The accumulation of historical data, often stored in diverse and proprietary formats, poses a formidable challenge, as researchers must now navigate through and transform these datasets to comply with NWB. The sheer volume of legacy data, combined with its inherent heterogeneity, turns the conversion process into a labor-intensive endeavor. Further hampering adoption efforts is the dearth of individual incentives for researchers to prioritize this time-consuming task. In the fast-paced environment of scientific research, where immediate outcomes and results often take precedence, dedicating time and resources to the retrospective conversion of historical data may not be perceived as an urgent priority for individual researchers. The absence of tangible, career-advancing rewards or incentives further hampers the motivation to address this critical aspect of NWB adoption.

Reviewer: We should mention how a growing number of institutions are actually leveraging human resources to help with the labor side of this endeavor

NYU: the librarians (I think of the scientific computing center?) offered to help some labs with the task
Brown: Ritt group, obviously [good opportunity to cite their paper]
Princeton: has software professionals that labs can request the time of for projects like this
U19: data core is specifically the go-to person to handle this for multiple labs
Non-profit institutions (Simons, ASAP): contracts with neurodata consulting companies such as CatalystNeuro

Will try to remember if we've heard of others

Should also give honorable mention to NWB export of for-profit data management and processing services like DataJoint, Inscopix, Allegro (NeuroNexus)

> Just as labs frequently seek to convert backlogged data, they are also often motivated to establish conversion pipelines to automatically convert newly generated data into NWB as they are recorded from acquisition systems. Automatically converting diverse neurophysiology data formats presents challenges due to the wide variety of modalities involved. Even a single lab may employ voltage recording, optical imaging, optogenetics, behavior, and more, each with its own software-dependent formats lacking standardization. A lab-specific conversion pipeline must take all the possible options into account to properly future-proof, or adapt itself to every new experiment that adds or removes a piece of software or hardware. These considerations make conversion pipelines using _pyNWB_ or _MatNWB_ alone difficult to develop and even harder to maintain for experimental researchers with many more immediate concerns vying for their attention.

Reviewer: I would move this section outside of the intro - it's unsolved even as of 2024, so we don't want to make it seem like it will be answered by reading further - perhaps in a section towards the end talking about future developments?

Author: The reason I included it was to emphasize that neuroconv provides a programmatic scaffolding to _assist_ in the development of automatic conversion pipelines.  I don't think it needs to be completely solved. It just needs to be easier with the suite than it would be with pyNWB alone.

Reviewer: Maybe the line selection from github doesn't show it right; I'm commenting on the second paragraph here

It's really not common yet for NWB conversion to occur "as they are recorded from acquisition systems"; in fact, usage of PyNWB (or realistically, `h5py` directly) is probably more useful in these cases than NeuroConv is

So I'd move it to a later discussion section as an idea/proposal of future work

Author: OK, I think the confusion here stems from the ambiguity of this paragraph. I was trying to refer to lab specific conversion pipelines that are developed in advance of data collection for some stereotyped experiments, which I believe are reasonably standard usage (see [A perspective on neuroscience data standardization with NWB: Pain points in the conversion workflow](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.04317.pdf)).  I was NOT trying to refer to NWB output directly from acquisition hardware, although I think my wording was definitely misleading. I updated the paragraph to try to clear that up.

Reviewer: Yes, this reads better now. The point was not make it seem that the acquisition setup could directly output to NWB from the device using any of these packages

> To mitigate these challenges and promote wider adoption of NWB, we have developed a sophisticated software suite comprising three core tools. The first, _nwbinspector_, is a command-line interface (CLI) tool that ensures the validity of NWB files, enhancing their reliability for uploading to sharing platforms like DANDI. The second, _neuroconv_, is a Python package that facilitates the conversion of neurophysiology data from various proprietary formats to the NWB standard. Additionally, it aids in the development of automatic conversion pipelines, simplifying the process for researchers. The third tool, _NWB GUIDE_, is an interactive and user-friendly application that allows for the conversion of data to the NWB standard without requiring programming expertise. Powered by _neuroconv_, this tool is designed to cater to a broader audience, including researchers with minimal coding experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To mitigate these challenges and promote wider adoption of NWB, we have developed a sophisticated software suite comprising three core tools. The first, _NWB Inspector_, is a Python-based tool that ensures the validity of NWB files, enhancing the reliability of their metadata when uploading to sharing platforms like DANDI. The second, _NeuroConv_, is a software package that facilitates the conversion of neurophysiology data from various proprietary formats to the NWB standard. Additionally, it aids in the development of automatic conversion pipelines, simplifying the process for researchers. The third tool, _NWB GUIDE_, is an interactive and user-friendly application that allows for the conversion of data to the NWB standard without requiring programming expertise. Powered by _neuroconv_, this tool is designed to cater to a broader audience, including researchers with minimal coding experience.
```

a) NWB Inspector also comes with a robust programmatic API so not entirely fair to just call it a CLI tool, though it hard-requires Python from top to bottom

b) NeuroConv can technically count as not entirely requiring Python due to the Docker images we have registered (to avoid referring to 'Python packages' twice in consecutive sentences; it's looking like down the like we might develop other more generic packaging similar to what we've done with the GUIDE too (so the user would never actually have to have Python or even Docker on their system to run it)

> To mitigate these challenges and promote wider adoption of NWB, we have developed a sophisticated software suite comprising three core tools. The first, _nwbinspector_, is a command-line interface (CLI) tool that ensures the validity of NWB files, enhancing their reliability for uploading to sharing platforms like DANDI. The second, _neuroconv_, is a Python package that facilitates the conversion of neurophysiology data from various proprietary formats to the NWB standard. Additionally, it aids in the development of automatic conversion pipelines, simplifying the process for researchers. The third tool, _NWB GUIDE_, is an interactive and user-friendly application that allows for the conversion of data to the NWB standard without requiring programming expertise. Powered by _neuroconv_, this tool is designed to cater to a broader audience, including researchers with minimal coding experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To mitigate these challenges and promote wider adoption of NWB, we have developed a sophisticated software suite comprising three core tools. The first, _nwbinspector_, is a command-line interface (CLI) tool that ensures the validity of NWB files, enhancing their reliability for uploading to sharing platforms like DANDI. The second, _neuroconv_, is a Python package that facilitates the conversion of neurophysiology data from various proprietary formats to the NWB standard. Its primary purpose is to make it easy to develop automatic conversion pipelines that ingest data from all recording and processing sources used in a neurophysiology experiment. The third tool, _NWB GUIDE_, is an interactive and user-friendly application that allows for the conversion of data to the NWB standard without requiring programming expertise. Powered by _neuroconv_, this tool is designed to cater to a broader audience, including researchers with minimal coding experience.
```

Changing the automated pipelines to be a primary, not additional feature; also, it's emphasizes elsewhere that everything in this section is for simplifying the process users

> To mitigate these challenges and promote wider adoption of NWB, we have developed a sophisticated software suite comprising three core tools. The first, _nwbinspector_, is a command-line interface (CLI) tool that ensures the validity of NWB files, enhancing their reliability for uploading to sharing platforms like DANDI. The second, _neuroconv_, is a Python package that facilitates the conversion of neurophysiology data from various proprietary formats to the NWB standard. Additionally, it aids in the development of automatic conversion pipelines, simplifying the process for researchers. The third tool, _NWB GUIDE_, is an interactive and user-friendly application that allows for the conversion of data to the NWB standard without requiring programming expertise. Powered by _neuroconv_, this tool is designed to cater to a broader audience, including researchers with minimal coding experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To mitigate these challenges and promote wider adoption of NWB, we have developed a sophisticated software suite comprising three core tools. The first, _nwbinspector_, is a command-line interface (CLI) tool that ensures the validity of NWB files, enhancing their reliability for uploading to sharing platforms like DANDI. The second, _neuroconv_, is a Python package that facilitates the conversion of neurophysiology data from various proprietary formats to the NWB standard. Additionally, it aids in the development of automatic conversion pipelines, simplifying the process for researchers. The third tool, _NWB GUIDE (Graphical User Interface for Data Entry)_, is an interactive desktop application that walks users through the process of converting their data to the NWB standard without requiring any programming whatsoever.
```

Expanded acronym on first mention; to call the GUIDE specifically out of these three is user-friendly would imply the previous tools were not in some way

Also slight rephrase, since one goal of NeuroConv is to remove any required programming 'expertise' per-se as a low-code high-level design, but downside is some minor amount (even just installing Python or writing YAML) is always required and some users can even struggle with that

Also removing last sentence - I think it's fine to include (or something like it with some rewording) in the GUIDE specific section but isn't necessary here at the intro

# 2023-ecosystem-paper
## Introduction
Neurophysiology research relies heavily on the acquisition and analysis of complex, multimodal, and increasingly large datasets, necessitating robust standards for data organization, sharing, and archival. The Neurodata Without Borders (NWB) format effectively archives neurophysiology datasets by storing contextual metadata information alongside all primary data objects, ensuring comprehensive and reliable long-term data interpretability. NWB also binds together all of the different relevant modalities for a given experiment, such as simultaneous behavior and electrophysiology, which are typically scattered across multiple different file formats. This enables robust reanalysis, since each NWB file has all of the relevant information about a given experimental session. The Distributed Archives for Neurophysiology Data Integration (DANDI) platform encourages data sharing and collaboration by hosting NWB-formatted datasets up to TBs in size at no cost to users. DANDI provides researchers a free way to meet modern NIH data sharing requirements, effectively archive their data, and take advantage of continually developing visualization tools.

>  The NWB format and DANDI archive not only facilitate the exchange of datasets among researchers but also streamline data for software tool developers. The highly standardized nature of the NWB format together with the easy accessibility of the datasets in the DANDI archive make the platform an ideal sandbox for emerging software domains such as electrophysiological spike sorting, calcium imaging segmentation, and behavioral pose estimation.

Reviewer: Same here

One common approach to this problem is to hire or leverage dedicated research software engineers (RSEs) [cite Ritt Group, NYU, Princeton] or contract with data management/consulting companies (ex. DataJoint) to convert the data. But, since these resources tend to be distributed across many different universities in institutions, much of the work maybe duplicated. Common conversion frameworks and tools can help accelerate development and make conversions easier for all stakeholders.

> Just as labs frequently seek to convert backlogged data, they are also often motivated to establish conversion pipelines in advance of experimental data collection, so that newly generated data can be automatically converted into NWB with minimal duplicated work. For example, a lab may develop a conversion pipeline on existing data, and then try to generalize the pipeline so that it can be used for any follow up experiments. Automatically converting diverse neurophysiology data formats presents challenges due to the wide variety of modalities involved. Even a single lab may employ voltage recording, optical imaging, optogenetics, behavior, and more, each with its own software-dependent formats lacking standardization. A lab-specific conversion pipeline must take all the possible options into account to properly future-proof, or adapt itself to every new experiment that adds or removes a piece of software or hardware. These considerations make conversion pipelines using _pyNWB_ or _MatNWB_ alone difficult to develop and even harder to maintain, and are often cited as a specific pain point [cite A perspective on neuroscience data standardization with NWB].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just as labs frequently seek to convert backlogged data, they are also often motivated to establish conversion pipelines in advance of experimental data collection, so that newly generated data can be automatically converted into NWB with minimal duplicated work. For example, a lab may develop a conversion pipeline on existing data, and then try to generalize the pipeline so that it can be used for any follow up experiments. Automatically converting diverse neurophysiology data formats presents challenges due to the wide variety of modalities involved. Even a single lab may employ voltage recording, optical imaging, optogenetics, behavior, and more, each with its own software-dependent formats lacking standardization. A lab-specific conversion pipeline must take all the possible options into account to properly future-proof, or adapt itself to every new experiment that adds or removes a piece of software or hardware. These considerations make conversion pipelines using _PyNWB_ or _MatNWB_ alone difficult to develop and even harder to maintain, and are often cited as a specific pain point [cite A perspective on neuroscience data standardization with NWB].
```

> To mitigate these challenges and promote wider adoption of NWB, we have developed a sophisticated software suite comprising three core tools. The first, _NWB Inspector_, is a Python-based tool that ensures the validity of NWB files, enhancing the reliability of their metadata when uploading to sharing platforms like DANDI. The second, _NeuroConv_, is a software package that facilitates the conversion of neurophysiology data from various proprietary formats to the NWB standard.
> Its primary purpose is to make it easy to develop automatic conversion pipelines that ingest data from all recording and processing sources used in a neurophysiology experiment. The third tool, _NWB GUIDE (Graphical User Interface for Data Entry)_, is an interactive desktop application that walks users through the process of converting their data to the NWB standard without requiring any programming whatsoever.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To mitigate these challenges and promote wider adoption of NWB, we have developed a sophisticated software suite comprising three core tools. The first, _NWB Inspector_, is a Python-based tool that ensures the validity of NWB files, enhancing the reliability of their metadata when uploading to sharing platforms like DANDI. The second, _NeuroConv_, is a software package that facilitates the conversion of neurophysiology data from various proprietary formats to the NWB standard. Its primary purpose is to make it easy to develop automatic conversion pipelines that ingest data from all recording and processing sources used in a neurophysiology experiment. The third tool, _NWB GUIDE (Graphical User Interface for Data Entry)_, is an interactive desktop application that walks users through the process of converting their data to the NWB standard without requiring any programming whatsoever.
```

Unless you'd prefer to have each sentence on a different line to allow different lines on the GitHub changelogs? If so should probably do it everywhere as habit

Author: Nope, one line per paragraph renders properly and looks nice to me. --fixed
